ZH-253 (#29)
GenomicDataInfrastructure/standard-operating-procedures: docs/GDI-SOP_ISM.md

Reviewer: Also please rename the document to ``GDI-SOP_information-service-management.md`` so that it fits with the repo style and other references

# European GDI - Procedures for Information Service Management for SOPs

## Index

1. [Document History](#1-document-history)
2. [Glossary](#2-glossary)
3. [Roles and Responsibilities](#3-roles-and-responsibilities)
4. [Purpose](#4-purpose)
5. [Scope](#5-scope)
6. [Introduction and Background Information](#6-introduction-and-background-information)
7. [Information Service Management Procedures](#7-information-service-management-procedures)
   1. [GDI SOP creation](#71-gdi-sop-creation)
      1. [European-level SOPs](#711-european-level-sops)
      2. [Node-specific SOP templates](#712-node-specific-sop-templates)
      3. [Node-specific SOPs](#713-node-specific-sops)
   2. [GDI SOP accessioning and file naming](#72-gdi-sop-accessioning-and-file-naming)
   3. [GDI SOP review and revision](#73-gdi-sop-review-and-revision)
   4. [GDI SOP access rules](#74-gdi-sop-access-rules)
8. [References](#references)

## 1. Document History

| Version | Author(s) | Description of Changes             | Date |
| ------- | --------- | ---------------------------------- | ---- |

> | v0      |           | First version of document released |      |

Reviewer: Albeit true, that piece of the Accessioning file is referring to SOP files. Document history wasn't envisioned to be _that strict_, but there's no reason we cannot make it so. In my case I added ``v0`` and would add ``v0`` here too just to keep track of changes that were not tracked automatically by GitHub but existed.

## 2. Glossary

The following table defines the abbreviations and terms relevant to GDI SOPs.

| Abbreviation | Description                            |
| ------------ | -------------------------------------- |
| OC           | Operations Committee                   |
| SDPC         | Security and Data Protection Committee |

| **Term**                     | **Definition**                                                                               |
| ---------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | European-level SOP instances | Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) to be followed for GDI processes at the European level. |

Reviewer 2: My preference would be without the "instance", if possible.

| Node-specific SOP template   | Templates for SOPs that can be tailored to the specific processes of each node.              |

## 3. Roles and Responsibilities

> | Role         | Full name             | GDI/node role   | Organisation            |

Author: I have added as reviewers those who have reviewed the document from version 0 and when it is approved, I will add the name of who approved the PR :)

| ------------ | --------------------- | --------------- | ----------------------- | 
| **Author**   | Mallory Freeberg      | Task 4.3 member | EMBL-EBI                |
| **Author**   | Marcos Casado Barbero | Task 4.3 member | EMBL-EBI                |
| **Author**   | Silvia Bahena         | Task 4.3 member | EMBL-EBI                |
| **Reviewer** | Jeroen Belien         | GDI-Member      | Health-RI/Amsterdam UMC |
| **Reviewer** | Mattias Strömberg     | Task 4.3 member | UU                      |
| **Reviewer** | Elisavet Torstensson  | Task 4.3 member | UU                      |
| **Approver** |                       |                 |                         |     
| **Approver** |                       |                 |                         | 

> ## 4 Purpose

Reviewer 2: I think it would be good to keep the numbering format consistent across the SOPs. The SOP0007 for examples uses 1., 2., 3. etc too and this would also go nicely with your sub-section numbering like 7.1.1 ...

**Steps:**

1. After a SOP request is received in the repository, a OC/SCDP member evaluates the request. If it is a valid request,the OC/SCDP member prepares the SOP draft from the [GDI General SOP template.](./GDI-SOP_sop-template.md)
2. OC/SCDP member shares template with the authors( OC/SDPC or nominated experts) to write the SOP (i.e. fill in the content)
3. After the drafting is completed, the OC/SCDP member shares the draft internally or with experts to review for completeness.
4. Both committees (OC/SDPC) approve the reviewed document.
5. The OC/SDPC member then shares the approved SOP with GDI MB for authorization.
6. GDI MB reviews the SOP and authorise or requests changes (repeat from Step 3)
7. OC/SDPC accessions ([7.2](#72-gdi-sop-accessioning-and-file-namin)) the authorised SOP according to agreed process and the SOP goes into production
8. OC/SDPC initiates periodic review cycle (repeat Steps 3-6)

> ![Valid: Proposal for creating and approving European-level SOPs.](images/GDI-ISM_schema_European_Level.png)

Reviewer: Another comment on the picture is that the last two bits, cloning and reviewing, sound to me like the OC/SDPC reviews the "instances" from the nodes, rather than the SOP "instance" that lives in the main repository.

I would probably modify the diagram last bit, since the review occurs in parallel with the cloning, and is not dependent on it.

Steps:

1. After a SOP request is received in the repository, a OC/SCDP member evaluates the request. If it is a valid request,the OC/SCDP member prepares the SOP draft from the [GDI General SOP template.](./GDI-SOP_sop-template.md)
2. OC/SCDP member shares template with the authors( OC/SDPC or nominated experts) to write the SOP (i.e. fill in the content)
3. After the drafting is completed, the OC/SCDP member shares the draft internally or with experts to review for completeness.
4. Both committees (OC/SDPC) approve the reviewed document.
5. The OC/SDPC member then shares the approved SOP with GDI MB for authorization.
6. GDI MB reviews the SOP and authorise or requests changes (repeat from Step 3)
7. OC/SDPC accessions ([7.2](#72-gdi-sop-accessioning-and-file-naming)) the approved SOP template according to agreed process and informs nodes ready to adapt to their own node processes.

![Valid: Proposal for creating and approving node-specific SOP templates ](images/GDI-ISM_schema_Node_Template.png)

_Figure 2: Proposal for creating and approving node-specific SOP templates._

#### 7.1.3 Node-specific SOPs

> For each Node-specific SOP, first a template is created and approved at the European level ([7.1.2](#712-node-specific-sop-templates)). Once approved, the template is then used by each node to create their own SOP instance ([7.1.3](#713-node-specific-sops)) which is approved at the node level. The Steps below describe how nodes will create their node-specific SOPs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each Node-specific SOP, first a template is created and approved at the European level ([7.1.2](#712-node-specific-sop-templates)). Once approved, the template is then used by each node to create their own SOP instance ([7.1.3](#713-node-specific-sops)) which is approved at the node level. The Steps below describe how nodes will create their node-specific SOP instances.

```

Steps:

> 1. OC/SDPC representative(s) from each node copy the SOP template to their node’s SOP management system

Reviewer: Here I would add a reference to the following document: https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/standard-operating-procedures/blob/main/docs/GDI-SOP_github-management.md

We should let it be known that their management system can very well be GitHub, so these can be cloned easily.

> 2. OC/SDPC rep (or nominated experts) uses the template to create the SOP according to their node’s needs and internally review for completeness

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. OC/SDPC representative (or nominated experts) uses the Node-specific SOP template (from [7.1.2](#712-node-specific-sop-templates)) to create their node's instance of that SOP, according to their node’s needs, and internally review for completeness

```

> 3. OC/SDPC rep initiates their node-defined approval process for the node-specific SOP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. OC/SDPC representative initiates their node-defined approval process for the node-specific SOP instance

```

> 4. [Node-appointed approver] reviews the SOP and approves or requests changes (repeat from Step 2)

Reviewer: Why is the first between ``[]``?

> 5. OC/SDPC members from the node accessions ([7.2](#72-gdi-sop-accessioning-and-file-naming)) the approved SOP according to agreed process and the SOP goes into production

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. OC/SDPC member(s) from the node accessions ([7.2](#72-gdi-sop-accessioning-and-file-naming)) the approved SOP according to the agreed process and the SOP goes into production at their node.

```

> ![Valid: Proposal for creating and approving node-specific SOP templates ](images/GDI-ISM_schema_Node_Instance.png)

Reviewer: Similar comment as above regarding verb tenses

> _Figure 3: Proposal for creating and approving node-specific SOPs instances._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Figure 3: Proposal for creating and approving node-specific SOP instances._

```

> SOP template reviews and revisions should follow guidelines for GDI SOP revision and review ([7.3](#73-gdi-sop-review-and-revision)) in the GDI SOP GitHub repository.

Reviewer 3: I assume this sentence does not only refer to the text for section 7.1.3, correct? It would be helpful to include it in other sections as well, such as 7.1.2, or in a part with more general information.

Reviewer: Agreed.

> ### 7.2 GDI SOP accessioning and file naming

Reviewer: I think this section is already covered at https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/standard-operating-procedures/blob/main/docs/GDI-SOP_sop-accessioning.md

Besides, this text is outdated and should be updated if we were to leave it as it is.

Author: Should I  remove this section from the document or just refer to the document: https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/standard-operating-procedures/blob/main/docs/GDI-SOP_sop-accessioning.md

> **GDI SOP templates** will be assigned accessions upon being approved. GDI SOPs template accessions will take the form “GDI-SOP00000.v0”, where the number before the full stop will auto increment by 1 and the number after the full stop will indicate the version number. For example, version 1 of the first approved GDI SOP template will be given the accession “GDI-SOP00001.v1”. GDI SOP templates must be referenced by this accession.

Reviewer: The digits of the identifier (e.g., ``0001``) are the numerical ID of the SOP. I'm expecting it won't reach 9999, but it's not a placeholder per se, and should be there.

Filenames for GDI SOP templates and node instances must contain the accession as the first part of the filename. The remainder of the filename can vary but must be separated from the accession with an underscore (“\_”). For example, if the GDI SOP “GDI-SOP00001.v1” is about how to manage node helpdesk tickets, the file for the template could be named “GDI-SOP00001.v1_Node-Helpdesk-Ticket-Management-Template”.

GDI-SOP00001.v1_Node-Helpdesk-Ticket-Management-Template-SWE.v1

**Supporting GDI SOP documents** will also be assigned an accession number…

Filenames for GDI SOP supporting documents must start with “GDI-SOP\_”, followed by a brief text describing the document, a full stop, and finally a version number. For example, the first approved version of the GDI SOP Charter could be named “GDI-SOP_Charter.v1”.

### 7.3 GDI SOP review and revision

> <_To do- describe a general plan for how GDI SOP templates, node instances of SOPs, and supporting documentation will be reviewed and revised. Include guidance for how to update “Document History” sections of all these documents._>

Reviewer: I would have liked for this to be elaborated slightly, we could at least mention the checklist I created here: https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/standard-operating-procedures/blob/main/docs/GDI-SOP_review-checklist.md

> ### 7.4 GDI SOP access rules

Reviewer: Any idea on what this could be representing? Should we elaborate, or remove?

_&lt;to-do>_

> ## 8 References

Reviewer: Depending on the review, we shall add more references here
